README.md, before:

# Abalone Age Prediction for DSCI 310 2025

## Contributors
- `Group 11`
  - `Alex Haddon, Maxine Paredes, Edward Sobczak, Emma Wolfe`

## Project Summary
The goal of this project is to apply machine learning techniques to predict the age of abalone based on its physical attributes such as shell weight, diameter, and height. Traditional methods for determining abalone age involve invasive procedures like shell sectioning, which can be labor intensive. Using a UC Irvine Machine Learning Repository’s dataset, we developed a predictive model for [abalone age](https://archive.ics.uci.edu/dataset/1/abalone), which is vital for fisheries management and sustainability efforts.

The project focuses on using non-invasive measurements to estimate abalone age, potentially offering a faster and more accessible alternative to traditional methods. Through the application of linear regression, the study explores how physical features of abalone, such as shell weight and diameter, correlate with age, aiming to improve predictive accuracy.

## How to Run the Analysis
---
### 1. Clone the Repository
Clone the `abalone_analysis` repository from GitHub to your local machine. In your computer terminal: 
```sh
git clone https://github.com/DSCI-310-2025/dsci-310-group-11.git
```

### 2. Navigate to the Project Directory
In your terminal change your working directory to the newly cloned repository:
```sh
cd dsci-310-group-11
```

### 3. Start the Container
Ensure Docker is installed and running on your system. Start the container using docker-compose in your terminal:
```sh
docker-compose up
```

### 4. Access RStudio in the Browser
Once the container is up and running, open a browser and go to:
```sh
http://localhost:8787
```
The password is disabled in the docker-compose.yml file so you will be able to directly access RStudio. 


### 5. Open the Abalone Age Prediction File
- Navigate to the RStudio terminal and change your working directory to the cloned repository 
```sh
cd abalone_analysis
```
- In RStudio, go to the Files pane (bottom right).
- Navigate to /home/rstudio/abalone_analysis.
- Click on abalone_age_prediction.qmd to open the file.

### 6. Run the Analysis
- In the RStudio terminal, type make all to run the entire .qmd file.
```sh
make all
```
- Alternatively, you can run each chunk manually in the R console, if needed.
  
### 7. Shut Down the Container (Optional)
When you’re finished, stop and remove the container. In your terminal use the shortcut `Ctr+c` then type:
```sh
docker-compose rm
```
---

## Dependencies
- `tidymodels`(1.3.0): for modeling and data preprocessing 
- `GGally`(2.2.1): for visualization, including correlation plots
- `ggplot2`(3.5.1): for custom data visualizations
- `readr`(2.1.5): for reading and writing CSV files
- `rmarkdown`(2.29): for generating reports and documentation

## Licenses
This project is licensed under the terms specified in `LICENSE.md`. Specifically, the `MIT License` and `Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International (CC BY-NC-ND 4.0)` licenses.

Commit message:

fixed dependencies, linked additional in docker file

README.md, after:

# Abalone Age Prediction for DSCI 310 2025

## Contributors
- `Group 11`
  - `Alex Haddon, Maxine Paredes, Edward Sobczak, Emma Wolfe`

## Project Summary
The goal of this project is to apply machine learning techniques to predict the age of abalone based on its physical attributes such as shell weight, diameter, and height. Traditional methods for determining abalone age involve invasive procedures like shell sectioning, which can be labor intensive. Using a UC Irvine Machine Learning Repository’s dataset, we developed a predictive model for [abalone age](https://archive.ics.uci.edu/dataset/1/abalone), which is vital for fisheries management and sustainability efforts.

The project focuses on using non-invasive measurements to estimate abalone age, potentially offering a faster and more accessible alternative to traditional methods. Through the application of linear regression, the study explores how physical features of abalone, such as shell weight and diameter, correlate with age, aiming to improve predictive accuracy.

## How to Run the Analysis
---
### 1. Clone the Repository
Clone the `abalone_analysis` repository from GitHub to your local machine. In your computer terminal: 
```sh
git clone https://github.com/DSCI-310-2025/dsci-310-group-11.git
```

### 2. Navigate to the Project Directory
In your terminal change your working directory to the newly cloned repository:
```sh
cd dsci-310-group-11
```

### 3. Start the Container
Ensure Docker is installed and running on your system. Start the container using docker-compose in your terminal:
```sh
docker-compose up
```

### 4. Access RStudio in the Browser
Once the container is up and running, open a browser and go to:
```sh
http://localhost:8787
```
The password is disabled in the docker-compose.yml file so you will be able to directly access RStudio. 


### 5. Open the Abalone Age Prediction File
- Navigate to the RStudio terminal and change your working directory to the cloned repository 
```sh
cd abalone_analysis
```
- In RStudio, go to the Files pane (bottom right).
- Navigate to /home/rstudio/abalone_analysis.
- Click on abalone_age_prediction.qmd to open the file.

### 6. Run the Analysis
- In the RStudio terminal, type make all to run the entire .qmd file.
```sh
make all
```
- Alternatively, you can run each chunk manually in the R console, if needed.
  
### 7. Shut Down the Container (Optional)
When you’re finished, stop and remove the container. In your terminal use the shortcut `Ctr+c` then type:
```sh
docker-compose rm
```
---

## Dependencies
[Docker](https://www.docker.com/) is a container solution used to manage the software dependencies for this project. The Docker image used for this project is based on `rocker/rstudio:4.4.2 ` image. Additional dependencies are specified in the [Dockerfile.](https://github.com/DSCI-310-2025/dsci-310-group-11/blob/main/Dockerfile)

## Licenses
This project is licensed under the terms specified in `LICENSE.md`. Specifically, the `MIT License` and `Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International (CC BY-NC-ND 4.0)` licenses.
